docs/index.rst, before:

OMEMO - A Python implementation of the OMEMO Multi-End Message and Object Encryption protocol.
==============================================================================================

A Python implementation of the `OMEMO Multi-End Message and Object Encryption protocol <https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0384.html>`_.

A complete implementation of `XEP-0384 <https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0384.html>`_ on protocol-level, i.e. more than just the cryptography. python-omemo supports different versions of the specification through so-called backends. One backend for OMEMO in the `urn:xmpp:omemo:2` namespace is shipped with python-omemo. A backend for (legacy) OMEMO in the `eu.siacs.conversations.axolotl` namespace is available as a separate package: `python-omemo-backend-legacy <https://github.com/Syndace/python-omemo-backend-legacy>`_. Multiple backends can be loaded and used at the same time, the library manages their coexistence transparently.

.. toctree::
    Installation <installation>
    Getting Started <getting_started>
    Writing a Backend <writing_a_backend>
    Migration from Legacy <migration_from_legacy>
    Package: omemo <omemo/package>

Commit message:

Doc improvements, renamed bundle to get_bundle, removed upper version limit on Python version, use string enum values

docs/index.rst, after:

OMEMO - A Python implementation of the OMEMO Multi-End Message and Object Encryption protocol.
==============================================================================================

A Python implementation of the `OMEMO Multi-End Message and Object Encryption protocol <https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0384.html>`_.

A complete implementation of `XEP-0384 <https://xmpp.org/extensions/xep-0384.html>`_ on protocol-level, i.e. more than just the cryptography. python-omemo supports different versions of the specification through so-called backends. A backend for OMEMO in the ``urn:xmpp:omemo:2`` namespace (the most recent version of the specification) is available in the `python-newmemo <https://github.com/Syndace/python-newmemo>`_ Python package. A backend for (legacy) OMEMO in the ``eu.siacs.conversations.axolotl`` namespace is available in the `python-omemo-backend-legacy <https://github.com/Syndace/python-omemo-backend-legacy>`_ package. Multiple backends can be loaded and used at the same time, the library manages their coexistence transparently.

.. toctree::
    installation
    getting_started
    writing_a_backend
    migration_from_legacy
    API Documentation <omemo/package>
